I'm migrating my multi-tier application with a web front-end to the Cloud

If you’re running a multi-tier application, such as a web server that connects to a database, Azure App Service is a good option that offers tight integration with Azure SQL Database. And you can use the WebJobs feature for running backend processes.

Choose Cloud Service for one or more of your tiers if you need more control over the server environment, such as the ability to remote into your server or configure server startup tasks.

Choose Virtual Machines for one or more of your tiers if you want to use your own machine image or run server software or services that you can't configure on Cloud Services.




Feature Comparison

The following table compares the capabilities of App Service, Cloud Services, and Virtual Machines to help you make the best choice. For current information about the SLA for each option, see Azure Service Level Agreements.
Feature 	App Service (web apps) 	Cloud Services (web roles) 	Virtual Machines 	Notes
Near-instant deployment 	X 			Deploying an application or an application update to a Cloud Service, or creating a VM, takes several minutes at least; deploying an application to a web app takes seconds.
Scale up to larger machines without redeploy 	X 			
Web server instances share content and configuration, which means you don't have to redeploy or reconfigure as you scale. 	X 			
Multiple deployment environments (production and staging) 	X 	X 		
Automatic OS update management 	X 	X 		
Seamless platform switching (easily move between 32 bit and 64 bit) 	X 	X 		
Deploy code with GIT, FTP 	X 		X 	
Deploy code with Web Deploy 	X 		X 	Cloud Services supports the use of Web Deploy to deploy updates to individual role instances. However, you can't use it for initial deployment of a role, and if you use Web Deploy for an update you have to deploy separately to each instance of a role. Multiple instances are required in order to qualify for the Cloud Service SLA for production environments.
WebMatrix support 	X 		X 	
Access to services like Service Bus, Storage, SQL Database 	X 	X 	X 	
Host web or web services tier of a multi-tier architecture 	X 	X 	X 	
Host middle tier of a multi-tier architecture 	X 	X 	X 	App Service web apps can easily host a REST API middle tier, and the WebJobs feature can host background processing jobs. You can run WebJobs in a dedicated website to achieve independent scalability for the tier. The preview API apps feature provides even more features for hosting REST services.
Integrated MySQL-as-a-service support 	X 	X 	X 	Cloud Services can integrate MySQL-as-a-service through ClearDB's offerings, but not as part of the Management Portal workflow.
Support for ASP.NET, classic ASP, Node.js, PHP, Python 	X 	X 	X 	
Scale out to multiple instances without redeploy 	X 	X 	X 	Virtual Machines can scale out to multiple instances, but the services running on them must be written to handle this scale-out. You have to configure a load balancer to route requests across the machines, and create an Affinity Group to prevent simultaneous restarts of all instances due to maintenance or hardware failures.
Support for SSL 	X 	X 	X 	For App Service web apps, SSL for custom domain names is only supported for Basic and Standard mode. For information about using SSL with web apps, see Configuring an SSL certificate for an Azure Website.
Visual Studio integration 	X 	X 	X 	
Remote Debugging 	X 	X 	X 	
Deploy code with TFS 	X 	X 	X 	
Network isolation with Azure Virtual Network 	X 	X 	X 	See also Azure Websites Virtual Network Integration
Support for Azure Traffic Manager 	X 	X 	X 	
Integrated Endpoint Monitoring 	X 	X 	X 	
Remote desktop access to servers 		X 	X 	
Install any custom MSI 		X 	X 	
Ability to define/execute start-up tasks 		X 	X 	
Can listen to ETW events 		X 	X
